moderator guide update (#100)
virtualscienceforum/virtualscienceforum: moderatorguide.md

# Moderator Guide

## Summary
## Your tasks
 

Moderation of a virtual conference involves more responsibility than chairing an offline session.
Speaker-audience interaction is important for the success of a talk, but in a virtual environment it becomes more complicated.
The moderator takes on the following responsibilities: 

> * announce and introduce the conference,

Reviewer: no need for commas in a bulleted list

> * open the program by introducing the event, organizers and the (first) speaker,

Author: ```suggestion
* open the program by introducing the event, organizers and the (first) speaker
```

> * monitor the participant list for raised hands and enable those attendees to ask questions,

Author: ```suggestion
* monitor the participant list for raised hands and enable those attendees to ask questions
```

> * handle any technical issues with the execution of the virtual conference,

Author: ```suggestion
* handle any technical issues with the execution of the virtual conference
```

> * monitor participant behavior in the chat for breaches of the code of conduct,

Author: ```suggestion
* monitor participant behavior in the chat for breaches of the code of conduct
```

> * give a closing remarks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* give a closing remarks.
```
* give the closing remarks

> * give a closing remarks.

Author: ```suggestion
* give a closing remarks
```

Below we provide more detailed information on certain aspects of the moderator role. 

## How to

### Opening and closing remarks

At the beginning of the seminar: 

> * highlight the speaker’s screen-share,
> * introduce the speaker (name, current institution, something about the talk or their current work),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Ensure that everyone is muted and cannot unmute themselves by clicking "mute all participants" and unchecking "participants may unmute themselves" checkbox.
* Announce that the talk is recorded and start the recording.
* Deliver the opening remarks. Introduce VSF and the speaker.
* Turn on spotlight of the speaker’s webcam stream,
```

* unmute the speaker and invite them to begin their seminar.

At the end of the seminar: 

* thank the speaker 
* initiate the post-talk question/answer period

> * stop highlighting speaker's screen-share.

Reviewer 2: Similar to above: the action is called "spotlighting", and it applies to the webcam stream and not the screen share.

> NB: a virtual conference cannot have applause after the seminar ends! However, Zoom does have a clapping hands image that audience members may put up next to their name in the participants list. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NB: a virtual conference cannot have applause after the seminar ends. This can be replaced by images provided by Zoom, such as clapping hands.
```

Reviewer 2: I think calling it "an image provided by zoom" is confusing. Also if these are instructions, we should try to formulate everything as an action. For example we could say "you may invite the audience to use the "applaud" emote".

Reviewer: I agree with making the actions specific. 

On another note, making sure to call out the platform (Zoom in this instance) for each specific action will make it easy to search for and change these specific actions if we ever change platforms.

Author: ```suggestion
NB: a virtual conference cannot have applause after the seminar ends! However, you may invite the audience to use the "applaud" emote.
```

* give a closing remarks

Below we provide more detailed information on certain aspects of the moderator role. 

## How to

### Opening and closing remarks

At the beginning of the seminar: 

* Ensure that everyone is muted and cannot unmute themselves by clicking "mute all participants" and unchecking "participants may unmute themselves" checkbox
* Announce that the talk is recorded and start the recording
* Deliver the opening remarks. Introduce VSF and the speaker
* Turn on spotlight of the speaker’s webcam stream
* unmute the speaker and invite them to begin their seminar

At the end of the seminar: 

* thank the speaker 
* initiate the post-talk question/answer period
* stop highlighting speaker's screen-share

NB: a virtual conference cannot have applause after the seminar ends! However, you may invite the audience to use for example the Zoom "applaud" emote.

### Question guidelines

Unless otherwise agreed by the organizers, the following guidelines apply:

Our suggested guidelines for when questions are allowed:
* Short talks: after the talk ends
* Long talks: questions may be asked at any time

Mediating questions:

> * Monitor the participants list to observe attendees signaling for questions (“Raise hand option”).

Author: ```suggestion
* Monitor the participants list to observe attendees signaling for questions (“Raise hand” Zoom emote).
```

# Moderator Guide

## Your tasks
 

* open the program by introducing the event, organizers and the (first) speaker
* remind the audience of the event format and explain how and when to ask questions
* monitor the participant list for raised hands and enable those attendees to ask questions
* handle any technical issues 
* monitor participant behavior, including in the chat, for breaches of the code of conduct
* give a closing remarks

The moderator role requires full concentration and continuous monitoring of multiple channels. In that sense, moderating an online event is significantly more demanding than the role of a chair in an offline conference.

Below we provide more detailed information on certain aspects of the moderator role, including instructions specific to the Zoom platform where applicable. 

## How to

### Opening and closing remarks

At the beginning of the seminar: 

* ensure that everyone is muted and cannot unmute themselves: checkmark the "mute all participants" checkbox and uncheck the "participants may unmute themselves" checkbox
* remind the audience that the talk is recorded and start the recording

> * deliver the opening remarks, introduce VSF and the speaker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* deliver the opening remarks, introduce VSF and the speaker, remind the audience about the Q/A format and to please report any technical issues to you
```

* turn on spotlight of the speaker’s webcam stream
* unmute the speaker and invite them to begin their seminar

At the end of the seminar: 

* thank the speaker 
* initiate the post-talk question/answer period

> * stop highlighting speaker's screen-share

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* turn off spotlighting speaker's webcam stream
```

* Short talks: after the talk ends
* Long talks: questions may be asked at any time

Mediating questions:

* Monitor the participants list to observe attendees signaling for questions (“Raise hand” Zoom emote).
* Let speaker and audience know that there is a question, and signal the asker by stating their name and unmuting their microphone.
* Leave the attendee unmuted while interacting with the speaker.
* Mute the attendee when finished, and “lower their hand”.
* In the event of a prolonged discussion get the talk back on track and suggest a private discussion after the seminar.

### Technical issues

* Speaker-side issues: where possible, try to have a second line of communication with the speakers in case an issue comes up on their end.
* Audience-side issues: attendees are instructed to send chat messages directly to the moderator if technical issues arise on their end, and the moderator must make a judgement call as to whether some kind of action should be taken.

Moderators should report on any such issues (and fixes) to the organizers or the VSF team, and also encourage such feedback from all participants.

### Misconduct

> In the event of misconduct from any participant moderators need to take the following actions:

Author: ```suggestion
In the event of misconduct by any participant in video, audio, or text chat, moderators need to take the following actions (in order):
```

## Your tasks
 

* open the program by introducing the event, organizers and the (first) speaker
* remind the audience of the event format and explain how and when to ask questions
* monitor the participant list for raised hands and enable those attendees to ask questions

> * handle any technical issues with the execution of the virtual conference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* handle any technical issues with the execution of the virtual conference
```
* handle any technical issues

> * monitor participant behavior in the chat for breaches of the code of conduct

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* monitor participant behavior, including in the chat, for breaches of the code of conduct
```

* give a closing remarks

> Below we provide more detailed information on certain aspects of the moderator role. Note that the moderator role requires full concentration, lot of focus and continuous monitoring of multiple channels. In that sense, moderating an online event is significantly more demanding than the role of a chair in an offline conference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the moderator role requires full concentration, lot of focus and continuous monitoring of multiple channels. In that sense, moderating an online event is significantly more demanding than the role of a chair in an offline conference.

Below we provide more detailed information on certain aspects of the moderator role. 
```

## How to

### Opening and closing remarks

At the beginning of the seminar: 

> * ensure that everyone is muted and cannot unmute themselves by clicking "mute all participants" and unchecking "participants may unmute themselves" checkbox

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ensure that everyone is muted and cannot unmute themselves: checkmark the "mute all participants" checkbox and uncheck the "participants may unmute themselves" checkbox
```

> * announce that the talk is recorded and start the recording

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* remind the audience that the talk is recorded and start the recording
```
Ideally the fact that the talk is recorded should not be a surprise.

* deliver the opening remarks, introduce VSF and the speaker
* turn on spotlight of the speaker’s webcam stream
* unmute the speaker and invite them to begin their seminar

At the end of the seminar: 

* thank the speaker 
* initiate the post-talk question/answer period
* stop highlighting speaker's screen-share

> NB: a virtual conference cannot have applause after the seminar ends! However, you may invite the audience to use for example the Zoom "applaud" emote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NB: a virtual conference cannot have applause after the seminar ends! However, you may invite the audience to use alternatives such as the Zoom "applaud" emote.
```

> 

Reviewer: At the bottom we ask moderators to encourage feedback from the audience on technical issues. We should therefore include a bullet point somewhere about that. Perhaps this makes sense at before the seminar, since the technical issues may disrupt or cancel the seminar and therefore waiting until the end for this encouragement may be less productive.

### Question guidelines

Our suggested guidelines for when questions are allowed:
* short talks: after the talk ends
* long talks: questions may be asked at any time

Mediating questions:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mediating questions:
```

> * monitor the participants list to observe attendees signaling for questions (“Raise hand” Zoom emote)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* monitor the participants list to observe attendees signaling for questions (“raise hand” Zoom emote)
```

> * let speaker and audience know that there is a question, and signal the asker by stating their name and unmuting their microphone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* inform the speaker and audience of the question and signal the asker by stating their name and unmuting their microphone
```

> * leave the attendee unmuted while interacting with the speaker
> * mute the attendee when finished, and “lower their hand”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* leave the asker unmuted while interacting with the speaker
* mute the asker when finished and “lower their hand”
```
Should keep the name of "asker" or "attendee" consistent on these bullet points. I like "asker" but I think either is ok.

* in the event of a prolonged discussion get the talk back on track and suggest a private discussion after the seminar

### Technical issues

* speaker-side issues: where possible, try to have a second line of communication with the speakers in case an issue comes up on their end
* audience-side issues: attendees are instructed to send chat messages directly to the moderator if technical issues arise on their end, and the moderator must make a judgement call as to whether some kind of action should be taken

> Moderators should report on any such issues (and fixes) to the organizers or the VSF team, and also encourage such feedback from all participants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moderators should report any technical issues (and fixes) to the organizers and the VSF team and also encourage such feedback from all participants.
```

> * Short talks: after the talk ends.
> * Long talks: questions may be asked at any time.

Reviewer 3: Is this still the case? I thought we discussed that every organizer will decide on their own way to ask questions.

```suggestion
As a general rule this is the format for:
* Short talks: after the talk ends.
* Long talks: questions may be asked at any time.
```

Reviewer: I think it is still good to mention a suggested format, but we can use softer language, like "Our suggested guidelines for when questions are allowed:"

Author: ```suggestion
Our suggested guidelines for when questions are allowed:
* Short talks: after the talk ends
* Long talks: questions may be asked at any time
```

Mediating questions:

* Monitor the participants list to observe attendees signaling for questions (“Raise hand option”).

> * Let speaker and audience know that there is a question, and signal the asker by stating their name and unmuting their microphone.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps add a line mentioning that the moderator decides when to stop the speaker for the question?

> * In the event of a prolonged discussion, you may get the talk back on track by suggesting that the conversation continue separately after the seminar.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* In the event of a prolonged discussion get the talk back on track and suggest a private discussion after the seminar.
```

> * In the event of a prolonged discussion, you may get the talk back on track by suggesting that the conversation continue separately after the seminar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In the event of a prolonged discussion, you may get the talk back on track by suggesting that the conversation continue separately after the seminar.
```
* In the event of a prolonged discussion, get the talk back on track and suggest a private discussion after the seminar. 

Same as @xabomon but with a comma

### Technical issues

* Speaker-side issues: where possible, try to have a second line of communication with the speakers in case an issue comes up on their end.
* Audience-side issues: attendees are instructed to send chat messages directly to the moderator if technical issues arise on their end, and the moderator must make a judgement call as to whether some kind of action should be taken.

Moderators should report on any such issues (and fixes) to the organizers or the VSF team, and also encourage such feedback from all participants.

### Misconduct

> In the event of misconduct from any participant moderators need to take the following actions:

Reviewer 2: Let's clarify: should the moderator take one of the actions, one then the other?

> In the event of misconduct from any participant moderators need to take the following actions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the event of misconduct from any participant moderators need to take the following actions:
```
In the event of misconduct by any participant in video, audio, or text chat, moderators need to take the following actions (in order):

> In the event of misconduct from any participant moderators need to take the following actions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the event of misconduct from any participant moderators need to take the following actions:
```
In the event of misconduct by any participant in video, audio, or text chat, moderators need to take the following actions (in order):

* Warn involved participant(s) of their behaviour and the possible consequences.
* Remove repeat offenders from the session.

> * Overlook chat interactions where the same rules apply.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't seem to belong to the list: it's not a response to violation of conduct. (as this stands, we're listing actions to take *in case of code of conduct breach*)

Reviewer: I agree this bullet item is unnecessary. I've made an edit suggestion above that explicitly states the venues in which misconduct can occur, including the text chat.

Author: ```suggestion

```
